---
title: Fight Club and our Construction of Self-image through Consumerism and Materialism
date: "2015-06-01"
categories:
  - writing
layout: post
author: Pramod Kotipalli
description: Independent Research Project for English Composition at the University of Washington
---

<!--
![image8](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/196009580-667e26ae-4a7d-40e7-a10a-041149a8f65e.png)
![image7](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/196009581-d130a7e7-0b3d-48ce-8ad7-6df3e9fb7f26.png)
![image6](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/196009583-fe9baa97-9939-4ea3-a032-89ed4310a742.png)
![image5](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/196009584-54308802-7ae5-46f3-97e2-85de345ffb42.png)
![image4](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/196009585-0ec07c58-11fc-4026-b24f-d376e0e8553c.png)
![image3](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/196009586-089cb4c5-c903-421d-82a6-184a8422018b.png)
![image2](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/196009587-6cc4da14-3010-4496-87c5-086a26658313.png)
![image1](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/196009588-23de3c57-47a0-4357-8f54-1b023a32bf7e.png)
-->

# Introduction

## _Fight Club_ as a popular culture artifact worth studying

The 1999 film _Fight Club_ and the 1996 novel of the same
name were produced in a pivotal period in the history of the
world’s economic systems. The early 1990s played host to
what seemed like the unquestionable dominance of the Western
capitalism over the Marxist ideologies of the East: the
Marxist Soviet Union was clearly falling and Maoist
socialism seemed to be in a definite decline. However,
Marxist and neo-Marxist intellectual criticisms were shown
to be alive and well in Chuck Palahniuk’s 1996 novel Fight
Club which itself was well-received and continues to garner
wide readership having been re-released in five and 10-year
anniversaries editions. This paper, will focus on David
Fincher’s 1999 film by the same name starring Brad Pitt and
Edward Norton because it effectively illustrates and
augments Palahniuk’s original arguments.

Overtly, the film is rich in critiques of consumerism and
materialism. More covertly, as this paper will argue, Fight
Club also constructs a complex argument regarding the
relationship between American consumerism/materialism and
the altered perception of the white male’s masculinity in
the late 20th century. Although not a commercial hit,
quickly developed a “cult film” status in its home video
releases. In fact, the film has maintained a place in IMDb’s
“Top 500” movies list since the film has been catalogued on
the site; further, the internet review aggregator Rotten
Tomatoes illustrates that 96% of viewers appreciate the
novelty of film’s ideas. In critical circles, the concepts
presented in the film continue to be debated by film
critiques and popular culture academics alike. When
considering the intertwined nature of Flight Club’s argument
and the films continued popular appeal, without a doubt,
David Fincher’s 1999 film _Fight Club_ is a popular culture
artifact worth studying.

## Relevance of the social issue presented in _Fight Club_

_Fight Club_ follows the story of an insomniac office worker
(known to us only as “The Narrator”) who finds solace and
sleep only by coming to tears to the confessions of others
in the support groups for those suffering from
life-threatening illnesses. After The Narrator’s apartment
explodes, causing him to lose all his worldly possessions,
he befriends Tyler Durden, a brash and anti-conventional
character who foils The Narrator in every possible way.
Soon, Tyler Durden alongside The Narrator, form an
underground fighting club based on the principals of a
minimalist living and, eventually, the carrying out of
anarchist activities in Project Mayhem; a growing anarchist
grand-plan which culminates in a plan to destroy credit card
companies debt records, thus bringing America’s society back
to ground-zero to reconstruct itself in a minimalist,
non-consumer-oriented culture. Immediately preceding the
execution of this plan, The Narrator discovers that he
himself is Tyler Durden having suffered from a massive
multiple-personality disorder. Despite a desperate attempt
to get his mindless fight club members to avert the plans of
Project Mayhem, The Narrator stands witness as his city’s
crowning credit institutions are brought to the ground.

## The current academic discussion

Most mainstream academic discussion of the film is centered
around a traditional Marxist analysis of the film and novel.
Some of these papers such as "America's Proletariat: Fight
Club through a Marxist Lens" describe _Fight Club_ in terms
of a class struggle as a Marxist perspective would indicate;
In fact, most papers in this field analyze this film as a
Marxist criticism of American society. Other academics
discuss gender constructs and the development of masculine
and feminine characteristics throughout the film while
attempting to tie in their analysis with a Marxist analysis
as in Tori Godfree’s paper “A Generation of Men Raised by
Women: Gender Constructs in ‘_Fight Club_.’” However, most
academic work on _Fight Club_ is found within film circles
where scholars debate the merits of artistic style used
within the film as an adaptation of the novel (see Kyle
Bishop’s “Artistic Schizophrenia”). This paper will take
another angle upon the film _Fight Club_ and will instead
discuss, through a neo-Marxist perspective, how the film
criticizes how we construct our own self-image and identity
based on our material possessions.

## What this paper will argue

Throughout the film, we see that Tyler Durden is engaged in
a constant criticism of the American consumerist culture.
The film then argues that this consumerism-oriented society
has feminized promotional perceptions of male masculinity in
late 20th century American society and has also altered the
way in which we value ourselves. In this paper we will ask:

how does _Fight Club_ establishes a relationship between
America’s consumerist/materialist culture and images of
masculinity conveyed through promotional materials? how does
_Fight Club_ illustrate how we have come to value ourselves
based on our possessions? These lines of inquiry are
relevant to our own 21th century where the internet and
ubiquitous advertising continue to expand in their in their
scope and subconscious power. Thus, understanding social
criticisms of our current economic system is vital to
understand how our macro-scale economic structures can
influence the way in which promotion can alter the way we
perceive ourselves as a departure or entrenching of past
ideologies. In this way, the social issues and challenge to
the dominant consumerist ideology presented in _Fight Club_
is still relevant today and worthy of study. Similarly, we
will also find that the neo-Marxist perspective is apt to
study and understand this film.

# Examining _Fight Club_

## Outlining the neo-Marxist rhetorical perspective

Sellnow establishes that the neo-Marxist perspective helps
“expose how material conditions and economic practices shape
dominant ideology regarding taken-for granted assumptions
about who ‘ought to be’ and ‘ought not to be’ empowered”
(Sellnow 115). In other words, neo-Marxist readings help us
understand how popular culture “reinforces or rejects the
status quo” power structures of “socioeconomic status and
materials as normal or common sense” or as a given in our
society (Sellnow 115). An element of studies known as
critical rhetoric, neo-Marxism allows us to examine how
texts “create and sustain the social practices which control
the dominated” (Mckerrow “Critical Rhetoric”). The aim of
this form of rhetorical criticism is to empower people to
free themselves from the oppression allowing them to
understand how rhetoric perpetuates the hegemony. The
neo-Marxist perspective is often thought of as a prolonged
discussion of the works of Max Weber (Burris, “Neo-Marxist
Synthesis”, 68); a developer of sociology who is often
thought of being in a prolonged “dialogue with the ghost of
Marx” (Burris, “Neo-Marxist Synthesis”, 69). Renowned
philosopher Karl Marx himself laid the foundation of this
perspective in his own writings where he wrote that “the
ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling
ideas” (Marx, 172). In addition, the neo-Marxist perspective
draws on various philosophers such as Italian Marxist
Antonia Gramsci and cultural theorist Stuart Hall regarding
ideology and hegemony. Further, we will see how the main
characters of _Fight Club_, who anti-models in the
neo-Marxist sense, challenge the hegemony by fighting the
preferred reading. Within this perspective, texts are seen
as sites of struggle wherein the mass media reinforces or
questions the dominant ideology. In summary, we can see that
neo-Marxist perspective examines the text for any and all
ideas, rules, laws, norms or other elements that are based
off of anything related to material possessions or wealth
that can reflect and/or serve to further perpetuate the
hegemony.

## Conducting/operationalizing a neo-Marxist analysis

Conducting a neo-Marxist analysis calls to attention the
subtle ways hegemony is embedded in popular culture with the
end goal of empowering us to become free from oppression.
From Sellnow, we are provided the following operational
framework for a neo-Marxist analysis (Sellnow, 123-126):

After we select a text that overtly or occultly challenges
the status quo, we are instructed to examine the text and
evaluate our conclusions’ implications on the target
audience of the text. When examining the text, the
neo-Marxist perspective commands that we begin to describe
the text in terms of the economic metaphors embodied in the
character presented as models (who we “ought to be like”)
and anti-models (who we “ought not be like”); as we will
see, this dichotomy is clearly presented between The
Narrator and Steven Durden in _Fight Club_. Next, we the
model’s and anti-model’s material possessions, statuses, and
the interaction between the characters; in doing so, we
consider what is conveyed as positive and negative in each
character.

Finally, we seek to understand the potential implications of
the text analyzed and the implications of the analysis we
present in terms of their effect on the target audience. In
the following section, we shall look critically at Fight
Club in terms of the ideas presented above; in doing so, we
will support our conclusion that Fincher’s 1996 film Fight
Club criticizes American consumerism and materialism to
extent of demonstrating that such consumerism has led to
establishing a status quo (i.e. hegemonic) ideology
encompassing feminized images of and domesticated behavior
of men in late 20th century American society.

## Examining _Fight Club_ – the dominant ideology, models, and

anti-models

In our analysis of the film, in keeping with the neo-Marxist
perspective, we will first establish the model and
anti-model characters in relation to the defined dominant
ideology. Next, we will discuss the characters’ statuses,
roles in society, and their material possessions. Finally,
we will consider the interactions between the characters,
the development of their relationship and their material
possessions, and finally how their actions are deemed as
positive or negative in light of the dominant ideology.

In the first few minutes of the film, Fincher establishes
dominate ideology regarding materialism and consumerism.
First we hear The Narrator commenting the following:

“When deep space exploration ramps up, it will be
corporations that name everything. The IBM Stellar Sphere.
The Microsoft Galaxy. Planet Starbucks.” (_Fight Club_
04:20)

As we hear The Narrator saying this, the camera zooms out of
a trash can containing various popular consumer brands such
as “Krispy Kreme”, “Sprite soda”, and many others. With the
rhetoric of The Narrator’s comments itself, we see
anti-materialist language with the negatively-positioned
word “corporations” and the monotone conveyance of “IBM,”
“Microsoft,” and “Starbucks” indicates a disinterest and
indifferent attitude to consumerist state of The Narrator’s
society.

Earlier on, _Fight Club_ more definitively establishes the
dominant ideology regarding materialism in the opening
moments of the film. In the beginning of the film, the
narrator suffers from insomnia, a condition that doesn’t
offer him any sleep for months on end. While The Narrator is
discussing his boring, repetitive office work, he comments
that

"With insomnia, nothing is real. Everything's far away.
Everything’s a copy of a copy of a copy.” (_Fight Club_
00:04)

In this quote, The Narrator is encompassing the consumer
goods like in the “Everything’s a copy of a copy”
commenting. Thus, _Fight Club_ is also commenting on how
continued purchase of consumer goods is repetitive, and
worthless, in nature. This scene clearly demonstrates that
the culture of mindless and repetitive office work and
consumerism.

We will consider two more scenes that further illustrates
the dominant ideology of mindless consumerism that Fight
Club eventually fights against this status quo. When
describing his home in the opening scenes of the film, The
Narrator describes his purchasing habits as “Like everyone
else, I had become a slave to the IKEA nesting instinct.”
(_Fight Club_ 04:40) He proceeds to disinterestedly list out
the numerous Ikea items he has mindlessly purchased as a
“slave to the IKEA nesting instinct.”

Finally, one more scene will illustrate how the dominant
ideology shapes individuals’ behavior. To conclude his
narration of his insomnia condition near the beginning of
_Fight Club_ and while The Narrator is laying down and
watching the Home Shopping Network on TV, he comments that:

> When you have insomnia, you're never really asleep and
> you're never really awake. (_Fight Club_ 13:00)

In this quote, The Narrator parallel his own inability to
rest with that of the consumerist/materialist world
surrounding him. In doing so, _Fight Club_ establishes the
main tenants of what we can observe to be the dominant
ideology of society _Fight Club_ takes place in:

rampant and thoughtless/mindless consumerism, and a restless
obsession with materialism and possession of all things
wanted Now that we have established the dominant ideology
(or hegemony), we can proceed to describe the model and
anti-model characters in relation to this ideology.

In relation to the aforementioned dominant ideology, The
Narrator in the opening half-hour of the film is considered
the model character. As seen in his work place, he is highly
conformist and engages in mindless activities. In his own
work, his responsibilities are driven by economic interests
as the neo-Marxist perspective would have us observe: The
Narrator’s occupation is a recall analyst in a major car
company; he assesses life and death choices by weighing the
cost of a recall with the cost of out-of-court settlements
(_Fight Club_ 21:00).

Prior to this scene, _Fight Club_ further illustrates the
monotonous nature of The Narrator’s job with a montage of
The Narrator being jarred awake upon landing at various
cities across the country where he is tasked with assessing
the potential of a recall. Through these two scenes and many
others through the film, we see that The Narrator character
we are initially introduced to is non-aggressive, reserved,
content, and lives out society’s expectations for a person
in his role. Effectively, these scenes and personality
traits illustrate how The Narrator is a model character of
what “ought to be” within the dominant ideology of mindless
actions and materialism. Because The Narrator plays the role
of a model, he would be considered positively in the
dominant ideology.

A foil to The Narrator in every way possible, Tyler Durden
serves as the anti-model. From his very first line in the
film, spoken to The Narrator as he is jarred awake during on
a business flight, we see Tyler Durden’s anti-conventional
thoughts that challenge the hegemony. When discussing the
purpose of oxygen masks with The Narrator, Tyler comments
that

> The oxygen gets you high. You’re taking in giant, panicked
> breaths and, suddenly, you become euphoric and docile, and
> you accept your fate. (_Fight Club_ 22:00)

These anti-conventional thoughts continue a few moments
later when Tyler Durden says:

> There are three ways to make napalm. One, mix equal parts
> of gasoline and frozen orange juice. Two, mix equal parts
> of gasoline and diet cola. Three, dissolve crumbled cat
> litter in gasoline until the mixture is thick. (_Fight
> Club_ 22:00)

We further see how this anti-model further challenges the
expectations of the hegemony that the model readily adopts;
Tyler Durden, _Fight Club_’s society’s anti-model, adopts a
non-conventional career that defines its own hours and
expectations: producing soap. Soap production is the only
Later on in the film, we see that Tyler Durden challenges
the hegemony’s idea of non-aggressive behaviors when he
instigates The Narrator into a fight behind a bar (Fight
Club 32:20). These three scenes clearly illustrate the
anti-model nature of Tyler Durden. Because Tyler Durden
plays the role of anti-model, he would be considered
negatively in the dominant ideology.

## Understanding characters’ material possessions and their

relationship to one another

Since we have already established who is the model and
anti-model and their respective roles in their society, we
will next consider their material possessions and their
developing relationship as ascribed in the neo-Marxist
analysis steps outlined by Sellnow (125).

Our model, The Narrator, has many possessions. We see
elements of his materialist life outlined in the beginning
of the film. The Narrator himself comments that he would:

> I'd flip through catalogues and wonder, “what kind of
> dining set defines me as a person?” (_Fight Club_ 05:30)

Here we see that The Narrator initially defined himself by
his own material possessions, tying his self-worth and
values to the products that he bought. Essentially, he is
‘enslaving’ his own thoughts and values to the ideals
conveyed in consumerist messages and his materialist
lifestyle. Such a statement supports _Fight Club_’s that the
hegemony promoted by consumerism has led to individual’s
valuing themselves based on their possessions. However, The
Narrator’s material possessions don’t remain static through
the film. After returning from a business trip, he finds
that his home has exploded leading to the total destruction
of all of his personal property (_Fight Club_ 28:20). Such
an event represents the forced abandonment of all of The
Narrator’s personal property and material possessions. With
nowhere left to turn, and nothing left to live with, The
Narrator turns to Tyler Durden, the acquaintance he had just
met on a flight.

Our anti-model, Tyler Durden, signifies the polar opposite
lifestyle of The Narrator’s. He lives in an abandoned and
rundown house near a factory (_Fight Club_ 36:00). Durden
lives without proper running water and intermittent flooding
that shorts out whatever power he has running the lights.
Durden also comments on how he has no TV, car, any form of
modern newspaper/magazine, or electronics. He makes his own
living as a food service worker for his city’s wealthiest
(_Fight Club_ 33:00). In short, Durden lives a minimalist
life absent of property, consumerist or materialist
tendencies; he is the pure embodiment of this society’s
anti-model.

In terms of their interaction, Tyler Durden effectively
makes The Narrator more aggressive and pushes The Narrator
towards a more minimalist life. Together, they establish and
grow an underground fighting ring and training house that
eventually develops into full-fledged anarchist endeavor
that The Narrator ends up protesting. It is important to
note that Tyler Durden also reinforces his status as an
anti-model when he directs Project Mayhem to attack credit
card companies; acknowledging that these institutions act as
a neo-Marxist economic metaphor that convey his culture’s
hegemonic ideas; these ideas that Durden are rebelling
against include the debt cycle of credit card consumers and
the materialist spending habits of consumers promoted by
credit card companies. Durden’s idea of liberating people
from their debt is reflected in an excerpt from The
Narrator’s monologue as he confesses the objective of
Project Mayhem to the police:

> If you erase the debt record, we all go back to zero.
> It'll create total chaos. (_Fight Club_ 121:00)

The very development of The Narrator into a more aggressive
and non-materialist through the underground fight club
further intertwines the relationship between aggression and
materialism. Through the movie, we see that The Narrator’s
departure from consumerism allows him to regain what Fincher
portrays as a more natural state of man. In this
illustration, Fincher and Palhuick argue that consumerism
has led to a domestication of man and his naturally
aggressive tendencies. This notion is further demonstrated
in a dialogue on a bus advertisement between The Narrator
and Durden:

The Narrator: I started seeing things differently.
Everywhere I was going, I was sizing things up. I felt sorry
for the guys packing into gyms, trying to look like Calvin
Klein and Tommy Hilfiger said they should.

Tyler Durden (indicating the ad): Is that how a man looks
like? (scoffs) (_Fight Club_ 45:00)

Such a scene effectively demonstrates what seems to be Fight
Club’s thesis: American materialism and consumerism has led
to establishing a status quo (i.e. hegemonic) ideology
encompassing feminized promotional images of and
domesticated behavior of men in late 20th century American
society.

# Conclusion

As illustrated through various examples in the film, Fight
Club argues against materialism and consumerism because it
has altered the way that promotion views us and thus the way
we see ourselves.

## Evaluating potential implications of _Fight Club_

We will now consider the effect of _Fight Club_ on the
viewer and the implications of this analysis. As previously
mentioned, the film conveys a strong anti-consumerist
message tied in with what appears to be a promotion of
anarchist activities. Thus, viewers may feel empowered to
carry out their own anarchist activities that have the
strong potential of harming others. However, if viewers to
be inspired by the film, they would in fact consider the
message that is at the heart of the film: you are not what
you own.

The reading of the film presented in this paper serves as a
subverted oppositional reading because it challenges the
status quo presented both in the film and in our 21st
century American society. As such, this analysis would have
the potential implication of compelling others to alter
their consumerist habits or at least be cognizant of the
effect that materialism has on our self-perception and
self-worth. As Tyler Durden himself put it:

You are not your job. You’re not how much money you have in
the bank. You’re not the car you drive. You’re not the
contents of your wallet. You’re not your f*\*\*-ing khakis.
(*Fight Club\* 84:30)

# Works Cited

"America's Proletariat: _Fight Club_ through a Marxist
Lens." Personal Blog. N.p., 09 Dec. 2012. Web. 10 May 2015.
<https://mypotatofamine.wordpress.com/fight-club-literay-analysis/americas-proletariat-fight-club-through-a-marxist-lens/>.

Bishop, Kyle. "Artistic Schizophrenia: How _Fight Club_’s
Message Is Subverted by Its Own Nature." PCASACAS, Oct. 2006. Web. 10 May 2015.
<http://pcasacas.org.seanic11.net/SiPC/29.1/Bishop.pdf>.

Burris, Val. "Chapter 3: The Neo-Marxist Synthesis of Marx
and Weber on Class." The Marx-Weber Debate. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage Publications, 1987. 67-90. Print.

_Fight Club_. Dir. David Fincher. Perf. Brad Pitt, Edward
Norton, Helena Bonham Carter. 20th Century Fox, 1999. DVD.

Godfree, Tori E. "A Generation of Men Raised by Women:
Gender Constructs in '_Fight Club_'" Student Pulse. N.p., 2010. Web. 10 May 2015.
<http://www.studentpulse.com/articles/227/a-generation-of-men-raised-by-women-gender-constructs-in-fight-club>.

Mckerrow, Raymie E. "Critical Rhetoric: Theory and Praxis."
Communication Monographs 56.2 (1989): 91-111. Taylor and
Francis Online. Web. 10 May 2015.
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03637758909390253>

Sellnow, Deanna D. The Rhetorical Power of Popular Culture:
Considering Mediated Texts. Los Angeles: SAGE, 2010. Print.

Tucker, Robert C., Karl Marx, and Friedrich Engels. The
Marx-Engels Reader. New York: Norton, 1978. Print.
