---
title: Hi Mr. Yang
categories:
- writing
tags:
- time-tracking
description: An open letter to businessman and politican Andrew Yang
author: Pramod Kotipalli
layout: posts/post
---

Hi Mr. Yang,

Your campaign showed me, an immigrant, a vision of America where I feel like I belong.

I first heard your voice before I even saw your face, which speaks to your incredible grassroots Internet-age activism/political strategy. Within a minute of hearing you speak about the problems of our time, I knew the Democratic party was going to working with a new force to govern with data and push our systems to help we the people.

Now just a few months from the suspension of your campaign, I’ve had a chance to think about the impact you’ve had on me as a citizen and someone who always felt out of place as many immigrants do. I have many friends who talk like you, are as compassionate as you are, but what I realize has been most important to me, you look like my friends do. (Only after your campaign did I realized why diversity of color on screen in our role models is actually important in showing that younger POC what they can pursue with their careers.)

For the past decade from first starting the journey into STEM in high school, I’ve made so many Asian-American and POC friends that I had the unique privilege of learning about race from our history textbooks, comfortably at a safe distance from the terrifying reality that many POC live through everyday.

As I grew more and more pulled into STEM, my network was increasingly occupied ambitious Asian-Americans and immigrants who are now working hard as engineers, researchers, or entrepreneurs. I never felt like my world-view, my immigrant story was all to common in America - I didn’t feel like business or politics were the game for me, maybe I should just lay low and live a quiet life.

Your campaign showed me that, no, I can pursue my dreams. Even as an immigrant who doesn’t look like “everyday Americans,” I can still work hard, empower others, and bring good ideas into the common dialogue.

I’m at a crossroads in my own life right now, should I pursue academia or entrepreneurship for the next six years? But, I know that whoever I might end up growing into, I have a place in our America and that my voice can bring about positive change to folks’ lives.

Thank you,
Pramod Kotipalli
