---
title: Living with a Remembrance Agent
date: "2020-05-15"
categories:
  - research
tags:
  - artificial-intelligence
  - human-computer-interaction
  - remembrance-agents
  - java
author: Pramod Kotipalli
description: My experiences developing a wearable and
  desktop-based remembrance agent. I also examine the impact
  of living with an intelligent agent such as this has had
  on my cognition, memory recall, and how I organize my
  digital information.
image: https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/146688349-93d418a5-c04a-41f1-b445-cf527923c6bc.png
layout: post
featured: true
---

During my undergraduate studies, I had the privilege of
working with some of the coolest hackers in the world: folks
in my research lab wouldn't hesitate to strap their latest
prototype (loose wires and all) to their bodies to test out
new modes of interaction between humans and their computers.
And all in the name of science! This culture of fearless
experimentation rubbed off on me.

As I dove deeper into the literature of intelligence
augmentation, one MIT Media Lab project always came to the
fore: the remembrance agent (RA), a continuously-running
automated information retrieval system. The implications of
this project were quite profound. Rhodes et al. demonstrated
that the RA could effectively augment a person’s contextual
knowledge to include all relevant documents ever recorded by
that person on a computer.

In the past few years, I’ve also had the opportunity to talk
with folks who have been using such systems for decades.
These conversations gave me great insight into how such
memory augmentation systems can improve the way our brains
structure information and how we take notes to make the best
use of a hybrid human-computer information system.

One such individual, who has been wearing a head-worn
display continuously for almost 25 years, shared with me the
profound impact that wearable “always-on” computer systems
had on his memory functions. He doesn’t have executive
memory; he needs an artificially-imposed structure for
memory to remember what most of us can recall with ease.
After a few years of taking and recalling notes through an
HWD, his mind passively[^footnote-1] learned how to develop
memory maps allowing him to learn naturally in the physical
world even when not using a HWD.

Following the spirit instilled in me by research colleagues.
I decided to run a long-term experiment on myself: I wanted
to understand first-hand how living and working with a
memory augmentation tool for a year could improve the way I
relate to the knowledge in my brain and in my computer.

I've been living and working with a memory augmentation tool
for almost a year.

## Background

From [Rhodes 1997], “the Remembrance Agent (RA) is a program
that augments human memory by displaying a list of documents
that might be relevant to the user’s current context. Unlike
most information retrieval systems, the RA runs continuously
without user intervention. Its unobtrusive interface allows
a user to pursue or ignore the RA’s suggestions as desired.”

[Rhodes 1996] originally conceived of the remembrance agent
as an extension for the Emacs text editor. [Rhodes 1997]
integrated the remembrance agent for use with wearable
computers like head-worn displays.

However, I am not an active user of Emacs (I prefer
graphical text editors). Further, there’s no remembrance
agent application for the one head-worn display I routinely
use (Google Glass). I use Google Docs for all my
non-academic note-taking. (I still prefer pen-to-paper
note-taking for coursework.) I use a single Gmail account
for all email communication. (My email threads have become a
substantial store of useful information as offline/async
communication has become more important in my day-to-day
life.)

For a remembrance agent to be useful to me, documents need
to be indexed and synced from my Google Drive and Gmail.
Plus, I want to use a remembrance agent on my PC where I
write most of my emails and take most of my meeting notes.
This requires a reimplementation of the original C-based
remembrance agent in a more modern and portable toolset.

## Development

I settled on Java for this project because of its use in
developing Android applications and its strong
cross-platform support for graphical user interfaces (GUIs)
through [Java
Swing](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swing_(Java)>) and
[JavaFX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JavaFX).

I created a no-dependency, pure-Java, Gradle-based project
that encapsulates the core functionality of the remembrance
agent. Following [Rhodes 1997], I sketched out a simple
interface for the “Remembrance Agent Engine” (i.e. the core
of the project). Conceptually, there are three functions
required to setup and interact with a remembrance agent

- `void loadDocuments()` which will pull documents from all
  the required data sources into the system,
- `void indexDocuments()` which will perform all the
  preprocessing required to efficiently produce
  contextually-useful document suggestions, and
- `List<ScoredDocuments> determineSuggestions(Query)` which
  will take in a contextually-aware query and return a list
  of documents and their relevance scores.

These three functions map clearly to the
[`IRemembranceAgentEngine`](https://github.com/remembrance-agent/remembrance-agent/blob/v2.0.0/src/main/java/io/p13i/ra/engine/IRemembranceAgentEngine.java)
interface resting at the core of this project. The
[implementation](https://github.com/remembrance-agent/remembrance-agent/blob/v2.0.0/src/main/java/io/p13i/ra/engine/RemembranceAgentEngine.java)
of this interface closely follows that of [Rhodes 1997].

### Data models

An
[`AbstractDocument`](https://github.com/remembrance-agent/remembrance-agent/blob/v2.0.0/src/main/java/io/p13i/ra/models/AbstractDocument.java)
is the base class for every type of document that can be
ingested by the `RemembranceAgentEngine`. It holds the text
of a document as well as contextual information about the
document. The various contextual factors of each document
are encapsulated in a
[`Context`](https://github.com/remembrance-agent/remembrance-agent/blob/v2.0.0/src/main/java/io/p13i/ra/models/Context.java).
These factors include:

- the location of the user,
- the name of the user (i.e. the
  [`person`](https://github.com/remembrance-agent/remembrance-agent/blob/v2.0.0/src/main/java/io/p13i/ra/models/Context.java#L13)),
- a short description of the subject of the query, and
- the date this query.

There are numerous concrete subclasses of `AbstractDocument`
which lend to numerous integrations like those for Gmail and
Google Drive. A collection of `AbstractDocument`s is stored
in an implementation of
[`IDocumentDatabase`](https://github.com/remembrance-agent/remembrance-agent/blob/v2.0.0/src/main/java/io/p13i/ra/databases/IDocumentDatabase.java#L6).

A
[`Query`](https://github.com/remembrance-agent/remembrance-agent/blob/v2.0.0/src/main/java/io/p13i/ra/models/Query.java)
tells the `RemembranceAgentEngine`’s `determineSuggestions`
method about the context of a query and provides a query
string used to search for relevant documents based on their
contents. A query has an associated `Context` which is
compared with each document’s own `Context` to determine if
the document is relevant to the query.

### Determining suggestions

The implementation of `determineSuggestions` is [quite
involved](https://github.com/remembrance-agent/remembrance-agent/blob/v2.0.0/src/main/java/io/p13i/ra/engine/RemembranceAgentEngine.java#L38-L100).
At a high-level, each document’s text is
[windowed](https://github.com/remembrance-agent/remembrance-agent/blob/03a7280872bfb1d6e6188d33836fa6fd1f45c6fe/src/main/java/io/p13i/ra/utils/WordVector.java#L29)
into smaller strings before comparison with a query.
(Currently, each window is simply a single line of the
document’s content as delimited by newlines.) Windowing
allows for TFiDF to match a query string against smaller
selections of text within large documents.

The content similarity score for an entire document is
calculated by summing up the TFiDF similarity score between
each window of the document against the query string. This
cumulative score is weighted against the similarity scores
for the contextual factors (location, date, etc.) to form
the similarity index for each document relative to the given
query. The scored documents are sorted descending and the
top `Query::numSuggestions` are returned from
`determineSuggestions`.

## Deployment

I sought to use the remembrance agent on my desktop and on
Google Glass. As such I enclosed the core remembrance agent
functionality in a no-dependency Gradle
[`remembrance-agent`](https://github.com/remembrance-agent/remembrange-agent)[
project](https://github.com/remembrance-agent/remembrange-agent)
that can easily be imported into other Java runtime
projects.

### Glass Notes integration

During my first quarter of graduate school I took lecture
notes and meeting notes on Google Glass. I integrated the
`remembrance-agent` package into this Glass Notes
application to pull up contextually-relevant notes for my
meetings and lectures. (The
[diff](https://github.com/glass-notes/glass-notes-app/commit/09eb5c01fff2b5fcab9700dddced27824f8a5310)
for this integration is useful for those interested in their
own such integrations for other Java applications.)

### Remembrance Agent Desktop GUI

My primary interface to the remembrance agent has been
through a desktop GUI.

![None](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/178388914-d6ca3582-e057-4330-bc41-888776f0b965.png)

As I go about my normal typing tasks, my keystrokes are
recorded into the “Keylogger Buffer” at the bottom of the
window. Every `5` seconds, the contents of the keyboard
buffer is sent as part of a query to the remembrance agent
engine. This ‘engine’ returns the top `4` documents ranking
by their relevance score (displayed on the left of each
document).

## Findings

After using remembrance agents for a year, I’ve noticed some
subtle changes in the way I relate to my digital footprint.

### Forgotten documents

There were numerous times when I was composing an email or
taking notes in a meeting where the remembrance agent would
pull up emails or documents from years ago that I had
completely forgotten about.

When writing an email to a colleague about “wearable
computers,” my remembrance agent pulled up my meeting notes
on a conversation I had with a brilliant wearable computing
researcher from years ago. With these notes at hand, I was
able to augment the content of my email to reflect knowledge
I had gained from the past.

I also found the remembrance agent useful when composing
reports, articles, or papers where various tidbits of wisdom
improve the content at hand.

### Extended memory map

The remembrance agent’s constant search for relevant
documents reinforces connections between my current context
and past documents. I’ve noticed that I have a strong and
faster mental recall of older documents.

(More such findings will be added here with time.)

---

[^footnote-1]: By “passive” I simply mean that he was not putting in a conscious effort.
