---
title: Balance
date: "2021-01-15"
description: Finding inner peace
categories:
- photos
- writing
layout: post
image: "https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/155825868-6ada81bf-69c0-404e-ad28-41fec88c3781.jpg"
downloads:
- name: "\U0001F4F8 Instagram"
  url: https://www.instagram.com/p/CKF47Vznt7_/
---

![]({{ page.image }})

BALANCE is difficult to achieve.

Someone with a great deal of patience placed these rocks
here at a park near Seattle's Olympic Sculpture Park. These
rocks are all different shapes, they aren't meant to fit
together. But with persistence and patience, this person was
able to find rocks that would fit together, that could
withstand the ocean breeze and subtle vibration from the
footsteps of people walking by.

I've struggled to find balance in my life. I've always
wanted to do more than I can: I want to exercise, I want to
take on another project at work, I wanted to take another
course at university. Time and time again I've tried to
balance between my many varied commitments Every single time
I've come out the other end feeling burned out and
exhausted, promising myself to do something different the
next time. But I never listened to that voice, that voice of
reason inside my mind. That voice would have spared me from
my pain, if only I had listened to it.

This time around, having experienced the pain of burnout in
a visceral way. I chose to do something different in this
new year. I asked my computer graphics professor, who is an
accomplished researcher and widely-successful entrepreneur
(i.e. a role model for me), if I could balance two very
large commitments, specifically in pursuing a Ph.D. *and*
running a startup. He told that it's really not possible,
that I should choose a "big thing" and a "small thing" and
orient my working time around that. It was such a helpful
way to think about my commitments and provided a sense of
balance I could never find before. It's quite amazing how
just a few words can have such a strong impact on the way we
think. With this new found inner peace, I've been able to
develop a genuine gaiety in my spirit, a hearty laugh that
can never be quelled. I'm happier than I've ever been.

I took this photo on a new camera I bought a few months ago.
I was (re-)discovering the city I grew up in, Seattle, as if
it was my first time, now with two of my closest friends
from college. It's in spending time with friends where I
find balance from my rigorous work life, they're a safe
harbor from the turbulent, uncertain winds of
entrepreneurship and research. 

I'll never forget the pain I went through until I worked on
filling all parts of my life with something to look forward.
I'm glad, and grateful, that I was able to regain my
balance. I hope you all find it too.
