---
title: Adventure
date: "2021-01-14"
description: Exploring the world
categories:
  - photos
  - writing
layout: post
author: Pramod Kotipalli
image: "https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/155815967-0968cbf1-2d06-470a-9fc2-7d3b88493cd9.jpg"
downloads:
  - name: "\U0001F4F8 Instagram"
    url: https://www.instagram.com/p/CKDZJJdFPFO/
---

ADVENTURE is a beautiful word. It's derived from
/adventurus/ in Latin, meaning "about to happen."

The most meaningful, exciting, and memorable stories from my
life are when I've gone off the beaten path, walked around
aimlessly, or just drove to random points on a map. My
sister, 10 years my junior, frequently joins me on these
adventures now that I've been at home during this pandemic.
One summer evening, my sister and I went out to Snoqualmie
to find this beautiful house I saw online. The photos showed
a long, hypnotizing driveway on a sprawling private estate.
The house was closed off, inaccessible to the public.
Although I was disappointed, I knew that we could still have
fun if we just explored a bit. We zipped around in our
electric car until we came upon a farm.

On this farm we found so many horses, just roaming around
and munching on grass. We walked up to the wooden fence as
the horses would walk to us and peaked over seemingly
curious as to what these two humans were up to. They were
majestic animals colored in white, black, brown, or
patterned skin and hair. Their large eyes and big ears
almost look human. They seem so friendly and happy just
eating the flora of their farm all day.

There's something quite romantic, even poetic about horses.
They're associated with the Wild West, a sense of adventure,
a sense of freedom for people who want to explore a
boundless world. Horses used to be the best way to get
around, especially in places where train tracks were yet to
be laid down. Horses and humans have a long history, they're
probably our closest friends. That's because they represent
adventure.
