---
title: Alyssa
date: "2021-01-13"
description:
  The best way to find yourself is in the service of others.
categories:
  - photos
  - writing
layout: post
image: "https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13140065/155812212-3cf879df-b300-4c53-aacb-b30caa926221.jpg"
downloads:
  - name: "\U0001F4F8 Instagram"
    url: https://www.instagram.com/p/CKAyklcFmW7/
---

Alyssa sat on the curb at the end of the Macy's parking
exit. Cars would drive by on the main road raising dirt and
grime to be deposited on Alyssa's exposed hands and poncho.
It was raining: the dirt became mud which caked her hands
and face. She was sitting on her knees under a translucent
plastic full-body poncho holding a tattered cardboard sign
with one word: "HOMELESS". Alyssa was detached from the
world around her, simply staring at the ground as people
walked by her not seeming to notice her. She wasn't wearing
a mask; this pandemic is the least of her concerns.

I saw her sitting there on the curb as I pulled my car out
of the Macy's parking lot. As I turned away, I couldn't
shake that look of resignation on her face. I drove back
determined to do what I could to help her. I walked up to
her, myself wearing a mask, prepared to buy her dinner and a
place to stay for the night at a nearby hotel. I walked up
to her and crouched so as to look her in the eyes, she
didn't notice me at first. I asked her in a clear and loud
voice, "What can I do to help you? Can I buy you dinner? Can
I get you a hotel room to stay for the night?" She seemed so
surprised that anyone even noticed her let alone try to give
her more than a few dollars.

As we walked to the nearby Chipotle she told me so much
about her life, that she had a child in the state's care,
that she couldn't stay at a women's house because of the
rampant drug use, that she was staying at a Motel 6 now
needing at least $60 to merely keep a roof over her head,
that she was religious and talked faith with everyone. It
was clear that life was just beating her down. Most
saddening to me was that her voice and thought processes
seemed addled by drug-use, likely illicit methamphetamines.
However desperate her situation, she's still human which is
why I felt compelled to try and help.

I gave her a double-bagged bag of food from Chipotle that
would last her for a day or two. I told her to take care of
herself as I impatiently tried to depart, now late to a
commitment with my sister. As I walked away in the rain, now
pouring down, she exclaimed to me "Jesus loves you! He
really does! Jesus loves you!" Unable to show her the warm
smile under my mask, I gave her two-thumbs up. Housing is a
human right, access to food is human right, healthcare is a
human right, and we must do everything we can to care of
folks who aren't in a position to take care of themselves.
