---
title: On Friendship
date: "2022-02-03"
categories:
- writing
layout: post
author: Pramod Kotipalli
description: "*sigh* :/"
redirect_from: "/friends/"
---

> People are in your life for a season, a reason, or a 
lifetime.

We hear these platitudes from our parents, our teachers, and
from some of the many people that come into our lives. It's
easy to dismiss such sayings as trite or cheesy. However,
what I've noticed in my growth is that these phrases are
*true* but require lived experience for them to gain
stronger convicition in our hearts.

My friend discusses friendship on his Medium blog. His 
language on this subject has still been rattling in my head
four years:

> Life is a train. It starts at one station and ends at 
another. Along the way, you pick up passengers: your 
friends, and the relationships you make. Many passengers get
on and of at different points along the ride. Sometimes, 
they get on in groups and you stay in the same car. 
Sometimes, a passenger will stay there longer than others. 
Occasionally, a passenger stays on with you until the end of
the ride. [^sofian-2018-train]

Indra also writes about the feeling of reuniting with close
friends from your past:

> The saddest part, though, was during the dinner. For a 
fleeting moment, a single point in time, you felt what had 
once been. Maybe it was a laugh. A shared inside joke. A 
little action she made, or a classic move on your part. Like
a small ray of sunshine peaking through a gray sky. But, 
then it was gone, quick as it had appeared. The potential 
had been there, but there wasn’t enough energy to start it 
up again. The friction, the energy it would take to make it
up the mental, metaphorical hill separating the two of you, 
was too great. [^sofian-2019-revived]

I went to a great high school in Bellevue, WA where I met so
many talented and driven children. However, in the last few
months of senior year, I grew increasingly disallusioned
with the pressure cooker-nature of our accelerated IB
program[^interlake-ib] and the fact that many of my
classmates earned admissions into elite schools like
Harvard, MIT, Stanford, and the rest. In short, I cut off
contact with almost all of my high school friends. It was
only after college that I started to value these
individuals and their interesting and diverse life paths.

When I reached out to many of these folks during my graduate
studies (after undergrad), we would get dinner, reminice 
about old times, laugh a little, and all the rest. But that 
feeling of "friction" made the "potential" of a renewed 
friendship disappear as "quick as it had appeared."

One instance of this feeling: Two of my closest friends from
high school (former but they didn't know), wrapped up a few
hours of video games interspered with banter about our 
lifes. After signing off, I thought "oh, I wish we could 
hang out some more, maybe in person back in Bellevue like we
used to do. That was the potential, tinged with sadness and
regret, but the feeling passed and I went on with my day.

I've had this feeling after a coffee with a physics PhD 
student friend of mine, my psychology teacher from four 
years prior, and on and on. Now, with my closest friends 
from college scattered around the US, the sadness still
comes and goes that we will never hang out like we used to,
playing board games and gossiping until 4am with all the 
other shennanigans associated with college communal or 
apartment-style living. Fun times.

That was a chapter, the sadness is okay, and the sadness
does fade away too, exponentially over time. The limit of
this function of sadness is 0. To feel sad about
physically-distanced related is to be human: for most of our
evolution in the genus *homo* we have been highly communal,
tribal, and nomadic people. It's the working together in
groups [^harari-2014] (together with a growing prefrontal
cortext) that propelled humans to the dominant status we
enjoy in the food chain. To be jolted into a new social 
context every few years due to graduations, new jobs, or
other circumstances is unusual for our minds.

(Side note: that's why I explored telepresence haptics
[^tangible-dot-team] through my startup venture, Tangible!)

Friendships are hard. They require *mutual reciprocity,
fairness, and a shared pace*. Beyond that, time and physical
proximity are most in developing close relationships of any
type. In the dimension of time, I've found that both the
number of hours and the number of days of silence are
important metrics.

Why days of silence? We all need a break from one another;
in those times, our brains are able to digest the 
interaction.

> Mutual reciprocity, fairness, and a shared pace.

These are my mentor's words. They've stuck with me.

---

[^sofian-2018-train]: [Indra Sofian, *Friends are Just Passengers on the Train of Life*, Medium.com, 2018](https://psiloveyou.xyz/friends-are-just-passengers-on-the-train-of-life-b88f5466fa08#:~:text=I%E2%80%99ve%20had%20many,them%20to%20depart)

[^sofian-2019-revived]: [Indra Sofian, *When a Friendship Can't Be Revived*, Medium.com, 2019](https://psiloveyou.xyz/when-a-friendship-cant-be-revived-1d1b6574ef4a#:~:text=The%20saddest%20part,was%20too%20great.)

[^interlake-ib]: [BSD405.org Interlake International Baccalaureate Program](https://bsd405.org/interlake/about/ib/)

[^harari-2014-sapiens]: [Yuval Noah Harari, Sapiens, 2014](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sapiens:_A_Brief_History_of_Humankind)

[^tangible-dot-team]: [Tangible Smart Clothing: Teleportation Powered by Soft Wearable Haptics](https://tangible.team)